The first Monday of the month of April 1625 , the village of Meung, where was born theseemed to be in a revolution as complete as if the Huguenots had come to do a second Rochelle. Several burghers, seeing the women fleeing towards the Grande-Rue, hearing the children shouting on the threshold of the doors, hastened to put on the cuirass, and leaning against their somewhat uncertain countenance by a musket or a musket. Pertuisane went to the inn of Franc Meunier , before which a compact, noisy and curious group was growing rapidly, minute by minute.


At that time panics were frequent, and few days passed without a city or another registering on its archives any event of this kind. There were the lords who warred between them; there was the king who made war on the cardinal; there was the Spaniard making war on the King. Then besides these secret or secret wars, secret or patent, there were still the thieves, the beggars, the Huguenots, the wolves and the lackeys, who were making war on everyone. The commoners always armed themselves against thieves, against wolves, against lackeys, often against the lords and huguenots, sometimes against the king, but never against the cardinal and the Spaniard. It resulted from this custom taken, that, the aforesaid first Monday of the month of April 1625,Frank Miller .


Once there, everyone could see and recognize the cause of this rumor.


A young man ... - draw his portrait with a single stroke of the pen: imagine Don Quixote at eighteen, Don Quixote embellished, without hauberk and without shorts, Don Quixote wearing a wool doublet whose blue color had been transformed into an elusive hint of wine-lime and heavenly azure. Long brown face; cheek-cheeked cheekbone, sign of cunning; the maxillary muscles enormously developed, an infallible index to which we recognize the Gascon, even without a beret, and our young man wore a beret adorned with a kind of feather, the eye open and intelligent; the crooked nose, but finely drawn; too big for a teenager, too small for a man to do, and a little exercised eye would have taken for a farmer's son on a journey, without his long sword which, hung on a skin belt,


For our young man had a horse, and this horse was so remarkable, that it was noticed: it was a bidet of Bearn, aged twelve or fourteen, yellow of dress, without hairs at the tail, but not without javarts on his legs, and who, while walking with his head lower than his knees, which rendered the application of the martingale useless, still made his eight leagues a day. Unfortunately the qualities of this horse were so well hidden under his strange hair and his incongruous look, that in a time when everyone knew each other in horses, the appearance of the aforesaid bidet in Meung, where he had entered there was a quarter an hour or so by the door of Beaugency, produced a sensation, the disfavor of which upset its rider.


And this sensation had been all the more painful to the young d'Artagnan (so called the Don Quixote of this other Rocinante), that he did not hide the ridiculous side that gave him, so good horseman that he was such a mount; so he had sighed deeply in accepting the gift which M. d'Artagnan had given him. He was not unaware that such a beast was worth at least twenty pounds; It is true that the words of which the present had been accompanied were priceless.


never support anything but the cardinal and the king. It is by his courage, do you understand, by his courage alone, that a gentleman makes his way today. Whoever trembles for a second perhaps lets escape the lure that, during that second, fortune was tending to him. You are young, you must be brave for two reasons: the first is that you are Gascon, and the second is that you are my son. Do not be afraid of opportunities and seek adventures. I made you learn how to handle the sword; you have an iron hock, a wrist of steel; fight at all times; Fight all the more because duels are defended, and therefore, there is twice the courage to fight. I have, my son, to give you only fifteen crowns, my horse and the advice you just heard. Your mother will add the recipe for a certain balm that she has from a gypsy woman, and which has a miraculous virtue to heal any injury that does not reach the heart. Make a profit at all, and live happily and long. - I have only one word to add, and this is an example that I propose to you, not mine, because I, I, never appeared in the court and did only wars of religion as a volunteer; I mean M. de Treville, who was my neighbor formerly, and who had the honor of playing as a child with our King Louis thirteenth, whom God preserves! Sometimes their games degenerated into battle, and in these battles the king was not always the strongest. The shots that he received it, and gave him much esteem and friendship for M. de Treville. Later, M. de Treville fought against others on his first trip to Paris five times; from the death of the late king to the majority of the young, without counting wars and sieges, seven times; and from this majority to today, a hundred times perhaps! "So, in spite of the edicts, the ordinances and the decrees, he is captain of the musketeers, that is to say, chief of a legion of Caesar, of which the king makes a very great case, and which the cardinal dreads. he who does not fear much, as everyone knows. Moreover, M. de Treville earns ten thousand crowns a year; he is therefore a great lord. - He started like you, go see him with this letter, and settle on him, to do like him. " esteem and friendship for M. de Treville. Later, M. de Treville fought against others on his first trip to Paris five times; from the death of the late king to the majority of the young, without counting wars and sieges, seven times; and from this majority to today, a hundred times perhaps! "So, in spite of the edicts, the ordinances and the decrees, he is captain of the musketeers, that is to say, chief of a legion of Caesar, of which the king makes a very great case, and which the cardinal dreads. he who does not fear much, as everyone knows. Moreover, M. de Treville earns ten thousand crowns a year; he is therefore a great lord. - He started like you, go see him with this letter, and settle on him, to do like him. " esteem and friendship for M. de Treville. Later, M. de Treville fought against others on his first trip to Paris five times; from the death of the late king to the majority of the young, without counting wars and sieges, seven times; and from this majority to today, a hundred times perhaps! "So, in spite of the edicts, the ordinances and the decrees, he is captain of the musketeers, that is to say, chief of a legion of Caesar, of which the king makes a very great case, and which the cardinal dreads. he who does not fear much, as everyone knows. Moreover, M. de Treville earns ten thousand crowns a year; he is therefore a great lord. - He started like you, go see him with this letter, and settle on him, to do like him. " de Treville fought against others on his first trip to Paris five times; from the death of the late king to the majority of the young, without counting wars and sieges, seven times; and from this majority to today, a hundred times perhaps! "So, in spite of the edicts, the ordinances and the decrees, he is captain of the musketeers, that is to say, chief of a legion of Caesar, of which the king makes a very great case, and which the cardinal dreads. he who does not fear much, as everyone knows. Moreover, M. de Treville earns ten thousand crowns a year; he is therefore a great lord. - He started like you, go see him with this letter, and settle on him, to do like him. " de Treville fought against others on his first trip to Paris five times; from the death of the late king to the majority of the young, without counting wars and sieges, seven times; and from this majority to today, a hundred times perhaps! "So, in spite of the edicts, the ordinances and the decrees, he is captain of the musketeers, that is to say, chief of a legion of Caesar, of which the king makes a very great case, and which the cardinal dreads. he who does not fear much, as everyone knows. Moreover, M. de Treville earns ten thousand crowns a year; he is therefore a great lord. - He started like you, go see him with this letter, and settle on him, to do like him. " from the death of the late king to the majority of the young, without counting wars and sieges, seven times; and from this majority to today, a hundred times perhaps! "So, in spite of the edicts, the ordinances and the decrees, he is captain of the musketeers, that is to say, chief of a legion of Caesar, of which the king makes a very great case, and which the cardinal dreads. he who does not fear much, as everyone knows. Moreover, M. de Treville earns ten thousand crowns a year; he is therefore a great lord. - He started like you, go see him with this letter, and settle on him, to do like him. " from the death of the late king to the majority of the young, without counting wars and sieges, seven times; and from this majority to today, a hundred times perhaps! "So, in spite of the edicts, the ordinances and the decrees, he is captain of the musketeers, that is to say, chief of a legion of Caesar, of which the king makes a very great case, and which the cardinal dreads. he who does not fear much, as everyone knows. Moreover, M. de Treville earns ten thousand crowns a year; he is therefore a great lord. - He started like you, go see him with this letter, and settle on him, to do like him. " the orders and the decrees, there he is captain of the musketeers, that is to say, chief of a legion of Caesar, of which the king makes a very great case, and which the cardinal dreads, him who does not fear great something, as everyone knows. Moreover, M. de Treville earns ten thousand crowns a year; he is therefore a great lord. - He started like you, go see him with this letter, and settle on him, to do like him. " the orders and the decrees, there he is captain of the musketeers, that is to say, chief of a legion of Caesar, of which the king makes a very great case, and which the cardinal dreads, him who does not fear great something, as everyone knows. Moreover, M. de Treville earns ten thousand crowns a year; he is therefore a great lord. - He started like you, go see him with this letter, and settle on him, to do like him. " and settle on him, to do as he does. " and settle on him, to do as he does. "


Upon which, M. d'Artagnan, the father, girded his son his own sword, kissed him tenderly on both cheeks, and gave him his blessing.


On leaving the paternal room, the young man found his mother waiting for him with the famous recipe, the advice of which we have just referred to necessitated a rather frequent employment. The farewells were on this side longer and more tender than they had been on the