The Ingenious Gentleman Don Quijote of La Mancha
RATE
I, Juan Gallo de Andrada, notary of the Chamber of the King our lord, of those who reside in his Council, certify and attest that, having seen by the lords of him a book entitled The ingenious gentleman of La Mancha, composed of Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra, assessed each sheet of the said book to three maravedís and a half; which has eighty-three sheets, which at the said price assembles the said book two hundred and ninety maravedís and a half, in which it has to be sold on paper; and they gave license so that at this price it could be sold, and they sent that this rate be put at the beginning of the said book, and it cannot be sold without it. And, for the record, I gave the present in Valladolid, twenty days of the month of December of one thousand and six hundred and four years.
Juan Gallo de Andrada.
ERRAT TESTIMONY
This book has no worthy thing that does not correspond to its original; In testimony of having been correct, say this fee. In the College of the Mother of God of Theologians of the University of Alcalá, on December 1, 1604 years.
Mr. Francisco Murcia de la Llana.
THE KING
Because on the part of you, Miguel de Cervantes, it was a relationship date that you had composed a book entitled The ingenious gentleman of La Mancha, which had cost you a lot of work and was very useful and helpful, you asked us and begged us to give you a license and power to be able to print it, and a pre-election for the time we were served, or as our mercy was; which seen by those of our Council, because in the said book the proceedings were made that the prizes lately for us on the printing of the books available, it was agreed that we should send this card to you, in the said reason ; and we had it for good. By which, for doing you good and mercy, we give you license and faculty so that you, or the person that your power may have, and not any other, can print the said book, entitled The ingenious gentleman of La Mancha, whose disuse is mentioned, in all of our kingdoms of Castile, for time and space of ten years, that run and are counted from the said day of the data highlight our ID card; under penalty that the person or persons who, without having your power, print or sell it, or make it print or sell, for the same case lose the impression they made, with the molds and rigging of it; and more, incur a penalty of fifty thousand maravedis every time you do otherwise. Which said penalty is the third party for the person who will accuse him, and the other party for our Chamber, and the other party for the judge who will sentence him. With so much that every time you would have to print the said book, during the time of the ten years, you bring it to our Council, together with the original that was seen in it, that each flat is signed and signed at the end of Juan Gallo de Andrada, our House Notary, of those who reside there, to know if the said impression is in accordance with the original; or you bring faith in public form of how by the corrector appointed by our mandate, the said impression was seen and corrected by the original, and it was printed according to it, and the errata indicated by it is printed, for each book of which thus they were printed, so that the price that for each volume there would be would be assessed. And we send the printer to print the said book, do not print the principle or the first sheet of the document, or deliver more than a single book with the original to the author, or person at whose expense it prints, or any other, for the purpose of the said correction and rate, until before and first the said book is corrected and appraised by those of our Council; and, if done, and not otherwise, I can print the said principle and first specification, and successively put this our ID and the approval, rate and errata, under penalty of falling and incurring the penalties contained in the laws and awards Our kingdoms And we send to those of our Council, and to any other justices of them, keep and comply with our identity card and what is contained therein. Date in Valladolid, twenty-six days of the month of September of one thousand and six hundred and four years. under penalty of falling and incurring the penalties contained in the laws and awards of our kingdoms. And we send to those of our Council, and to any other justices of them, keep and comply with our identity card and what is contained therein. Date in Valladolid, twenty-six days of the month of September of one thousand and six hundred and four years. under penalty of falling and incurring the penalties contained in the laws and awards of our kingdoms. And we send to those of our Council, and to any other justices of them, keep and comply with our identity card and what is contained therein. Date in Valladolid, twenty-six days of the month of September of one thousand and six hundred and four years.
I, THE KING.
By order of the King our lord:
Juan de Amezqueta.
TO THE DUKE OF BÉJAR,
Marquis de Gibraleón, count of Benalcázar y Bañares, viscount of La Puebla de Alcocer, lord of the towns of Capilla, Curiel and Burguillos
In faith of the good hospitality and honor that Your Excellency does to all kinds of books, as a prince so inclined to favor the good arts, especially those who by their nobility do not get down to the service and farms of the vulgar, I have determined to bring to light the Ingenious gentleman Don Quixote de la Mancha, sheltered by the very clear name of Your Excellency, to whom, with the compliance I owe so much greatness, I beg you to receive him pleasantly in his protection, so that in his shadow, although naked from that precious ornament of elegance and erudition that the works that are made up in the houses of the men who know are usually dressed dressed, or surely appear in the judgment of some who, continuing in the limits of their ignorance, usually condemn the work with more rigor and less justice other people's; what,
Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra.
FOREWORD
Unemployed reader: without oath you can believe me that I want this book, as a child of understanding, to be the most beautiful, the most gallant and the most discreet one could imagine. But I could not contravene the order of nature; that in her every thing begets her fellow man. And so, what can beget the barren and ill-cultivated ingenuity of mine, but the story of a dry son, countersunk, craving and full of various thoughts and never imagined of any other, as well as who was begotten in a prison, where all discomfort Has your seat and where does all the sad noise make your room? The calm, the peaceful place, the amenity of the fields, the serenity of the heavens, the murmuring of the fountains, the stillness of the spirit is a large part so that the most sterile muses are fruitful and offer births to the world that fill it with wonder and contentment. It happens to have a father an ugly son and without any grace, and the love he has puts a blindfold on him so that he does not see his faults, before he judges them by discretion and kindness and tells them to his friends for sharpness and donors. But I, who, although I look like a father, I'm Don Quixote's stepfather, I don't want to leave with the current of use, nor beg you, almost with tears in my eyes, as others do, dear reader, who forgives or disguises the faults that in this my son you see; and you are neither his relative nor his friend, and you have your soul in your body and your free will as the most painted, and you are in your house, where you are lord della, as the king of his alcabalas, and you know what is commonly said: that under my mantle, I kill the king. All of which presents you and makes you free from all respect and obligation; and so, you can tell from history everything that seems to you, without fear that you will be calmed by evil or reward you for the good you say of it.
I would just like to give it to you cute and naked, without the prologue ornament, nor of the innumerability and catalog of the usual sonnets, epigrams and compliments that are usually put at the beginning of the books. Because I know how to say that, although it took me some work to compose it, none of them had more to do this preface that you are reading. Many times I took the pen to write, and many times I left it, for not knowing what I would write; and, being a suspense, with the paper in front, the pen in the ear, the elbow in the firm and the hand on the cheek, thinking what I would say, a friend of mine, funny and well understood, came into view, who, seeing me so imaginative, the cause asked me; and, not covering it up, I told him that I was thinking about the prologue that I had to make to Don Quijote's story, and that I was lucky that I didn't want to do it,
- Because, how do you want me not to be confused what the old legislator will call vulgar when I see that, after so many years as I have slept in the silence of oblivion, I leave now, with all my years in tow, with a dry legend like a esparto, oblivious of invention, diminished in style, poor in agreements and lack of all scholarship and doctrine; without limits on the margins and without annotations at the end of the book, as I see that there are other books, even if they are fabulous and profane, so full of sentences of Aristotle, Plato and the whole philosopher catere, who admire the readers and Do they have their authors for men read, learned and eloquent? Well what, when they quote the Divine Scripture! They will not say that they are Tomases saints and other doctors of the Church; keeping in this a so ingenious decorum, that in one line they have painted an unloved crush and in another they make a Christian sermonic, which is a content and a gift oílle or leelle. All of this must lack my book, because I have nothing to limit in the margin, or what to write down in the end, I do not even know what authors I follow in it, to put them at the beginning, as they all do, by the letters of ABC, starting in Aristotle and ending in Xenofonte and Zoílo or Zeuxis, although the one was cursed and the other painter. My book of sonnets must also be lacking at the beginning, at least of sonnets whose authors are dukes, marquises, counts, bishops, ladies or celebrated poets; although, if I asked two or three friendly officers, I know that they would give them to me, and such, that they would not match those of those who have more names in our Spain. Anyway, sir and my friend, ”I continued,“ I determine that Mr. Don Quixote is buried in his files in La Mancha, until heaven shows who adorns him with as many things as he lacks; because I am